Anemia
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
0
Anemia
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
What Is Anemia?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment and Management
Anemia in Pregnancy
Types of Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Anemia
Anemia Aplastic Anemia
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What is aplastic anemia?
What it is
Despite its name, aplastic anemia, or bone marrow failure, is more than anemia. Aplastic anemia is a rare but serious blood condition that occurs when your bone marrow cannot make enough new blood cells for your body to work normally. It can develop quickly or slowly, and it can be mild or serious. At this time, there is no way to prevent aplastic anemia.
What are the symptoms of aplastic anemia?
Symptoms
Symptoms of aplastic anemia include:
Fatigue
Infections that last a long time
Easy bruising or bleeding
How is aplastic anemia diagnosed?
Diagnosis
To diagnose aplastic anemia, your doctor will order tests to find out whether you have low numbers of cells in your bone marrow and blood.
What causes aplastic anemia?
Causes
Aplastic anemia is caused by damage to
stem cells
stem cell
(stem sel):
A cell from which other types of cells develop. For example, blood cells develop from blood-forming stem cells.
inside your bone marrow, which is the sponge-like tissue within your bones. Many diseases and conditions can damage the stem cells in bone marrow. As a result, the bone marrow makes fewer
red blood cells
red blood cell
(red bluhd sel):
A type of blood cell that carries oxygen to all parts of the body; also known as an erythrocyte.
,
white blood cells
white blood cell
A type of cell that is part of the body’s immune system. White blood cells help the body fight infection and other diseases.
, and
platelets
platelet
(PLAYT-let):
A tiny piece of a cell that helps form blood clots to slow or stop bleeding and to help wounds heal; also known as a thrombocyte.
.
The most common cause of bone marrow damage is from your
immune system
immune system
(ih-MYOON sis-tum):
The body’s system of defense against viruses, bacteria, and other foreign materials. It includes many kinds of cells and interrelated responses.
attacking and destroying the stem cells in your bone marrow. This is a type of autoimmune illness, a disease that makes your body attack itself. Other causes of aplastic anemia include some medicines, such as those used in chemotherapy, and exposure to toxins or chemicals in the environment.
You can also inherit the condition, in rare cases.
How is aplastic anemia treated?
Treatments
Treatments for aplastic anemia may include the following:
Blood and bone marrow transplants, which may cure aplastic anemia in some people
Blood transfusions
Medicines to stop your immune system from destroying the stem cells in your bone marrow
Medicines to help your body make new blood cells
Removing or staying away from toxins in your environment
Your doctor will monitor your condition and screen you for blood conditions regularly. If you take medicine that affects your immune system, you will also need to take steps to prevent infection and get annual flu shots.
What happens if aplastic anemia is not treated?
What happens if not treated
Aplastic anemia can raise your risk of complications such as bleeding, leukemia, or other serious blood conditions. Without treatment, aplastic anemia can lead to serious medical conditions such as an irregular heartbeat and heart failure.
Last updated on March 24, 2022