Anemia
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
0
Anemia
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
What Is Anemia?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment and Management
Anemia in Pregnancy
Types of Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Anemia
Anemia Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What is vitamin B12–deficiency anemia?
What it is
Vitamin B12–deficiency anemia, also known as cobalamin deficiency, is a condition that develops when your body can't make enough healthy red blood cells because it doesn't have enough vitamin B12. Your body needs vitamin B12 to make healthy
red blood cells
red blood cell
(red bluhd sel):
A type of blood cell that carries oxygen to all parts of the body; also known as an erythrocyte.
,
white blood cells
white blood cell
A type of cell that is part of the body’s immune system. White blood cells help the body fight infection and other diseases.
, and
platelets
platelet
(PLAYT-let):
A tiny piece of a cell that helps form blood clots to slow or stop bleeding and to help wounds heal; also known as a thrombocyte.
. Since your body doesn’t make vitamin B12, you have to get it from the foods you eat or from supplements.
You can get vitamin B12 deficiency if you can’t absorb vitamin B12 due to problems with your gut or if you have pernicious anemia, which makes it difficult to absorb vitamin B12 from your intestines. Without enough vitamin B12, blood cells do not form properly inside your bone marrow, the sponge-like tissue within your bones. These blood cells die sooner than normal, leading to anemia.
What are the symptoms of vitamin B12–deficiency anemia?
Symptoms
If you have vitamin B12–deficiency anemia, you may have the typical symptoms of anemia at first, such as fatigue, paleness, shortness of breath, headaches, or dizziness. If left untreated, you may start to notice brain and nervous system symptoms. This is because vitamin B12 is also needed for your brain and your nerves to work properly.
Your symptoms may include:
Tingling feelings or pain
Trouble walking
Uncontrollable muscle movements
Confusion, slower thinking, forgetfulness, and memory loss
Mood or mental changes, such as depression or irritability
Problems with smell or taste
Vision problems
Diarrhea and weight loss
Glossitis, which is a painful, smooth, red tongue
What causes vitamin B12–deficiency anemia?
Causes
You can develop vitamin B12–deficiency anemia if you do not eat enough food with vitamin B12, such as if you follow a strict vegetarian or vegan diet. But this is rare. In the United States, vitamin B12–deficiency anemia is most often due to other risk factors.
You can develop vitamin B12 deficiency for the following reasons:
Lack of intrinsic factor: Intrinsic factor is a protein made in the stomach, which helps the body absorb vitamin B12. People who have pernicious anemia do not produce intrinsic factor. Pernicious anemia is more common in people with northern European or African ancestry. You may develop vitamin B12–deficiency anemia if your body is not able to absorb enough vitamin B12 from the foods you eat. Older adults are more likely to have digestive problems that make it harder to absorb vitamin B12.
Lifestyle habits: Drinking too much alcohol can make it harder for your body to absorb vitamin B12. For men this is more than two drinks in a day. For women, it’s more than one drink in a day.
Medicines: Taking certain medicines can make it harder for your body to absorb vitamin B12 over time. These include some heartburn medicines and metformin to treat diabetes.
Medical conditions: Some medical conditions can raise your risk of vitamin B12–deficiency anemia. These include:
Autoimmune diseases, such as celiac disease, type 1 diabetes, and thyroid disease
Chronic pancreatic disease
Genetic conditions, such as Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome, inherited intrinsic factor deficiency, and inherited transcobalamin deficiency
Intestinal and digestive conditions, such as ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and Helicobacter pylori infection
Vitiligo
Stomach surgery: Surgery on your stomach or intestines, such as weight-loss surgery or gastrectomy, can make it harder for your body to absorb vitamin B12.
How do you prevent vitamin B12 deficiency?
Prevention
If you are otherwise healthy, maintaining a normal diet enriched in vitamin B12 is important.
Foods that are good sources of vitamin B12 include:
Lean red meat and chicken
Fish, such as catfish and salmon; and seafood, such as clams and oysters
Milk, yogurt, cheese, and fortified vegan milk substitutes
Fortified cereals
Eggs
How much vitamin B12 do you need each day?
Vitamin B12 recommendations
The recommended daily amounts of vitamin B12 depend on your age, your sex, and whether you are pregnant or breastfeeding. Your healthcare provider can look at your medical history to help determine how much vitamin B12 you need each day.
Recommended daily vitamin B12 intake for children and adults
Recommended Daily Amounts of Vitamin B12, in micrograms (mcg)
AgeMale or FemalePregnancyBreastfeeding
1–3 years
0.9 mcg
4–8 years
1.2 mcg
9–13 years
1.8 mcg
14–18 years
2.4 mcg
2.6 mcg
2.8 mcg
19–50 years
2.4 mcg
2.6 mcg
2.8 mcg
51+ years
2.4 mcg (mostly from fortified foods or a supplement)
How is vitamin B12–deficiency anemia diagnosed?
Diagnosis
To screen for vitamin B12–deficiency anemia, your healthcare provider may order blood tests to see whether you have low
hemoglobin
hemoglobin
(HEE-moh-GLOH-bin):
A protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body.
or vitamin B12 levels.
Healthy and Abnormal Blood Levels in Adults
Hemoglobin, g/dL
Normal
Men: 13 or higherWomen: 12 or higher
Anemia
Men: 12 or lowerWomen: 11 or lower
Vitamin B12, pg/mL
Normal
400 or higher
Vitamin B12-deficiency
200 or lower (although levels may be normal in some cases
Tests to screen for vitamin B12-deficiency anemia. A complete blood count measures hemoglobin. Another blood test measures vitamin B12 levels in the blood. You may still have the condition even if your vitamin B12 levels are normal.
How is vitamin B12–deficiency anemia treated?
Treatments
If your doctor diagnoses you with vitamin B12–deficiency anemia, your treatment will depend on the cause and seriousness of your condition. Some people need lifelong treatment.
Different therapies can be used to treat anemia.
Vitamin B12 medicine can be prescribed by your provider for you to take by mouth or as a nose spray or a shot. These supplements can help increase the levels of vitamin B12 in your body. For serious vitamin B12–deficiency anemia, your doctor may recommend vitamin B12 shots until your levels are healthy.
Blood transfusions to treat serious vitamin B12–deficiency anemia in combination with vitamin B12 treatment.
Your care provider may also recommend you make some changes to your eating habits to help increase the amount of vitamin B12 in your diet.
Some symptoms may take months to improve, depending on how serious they are. Some symptoms related to the brain or the nerves, such as numbness and tingling, may not go away even with treatment.
What happens if vitamin B12–deficiency anemia is not treated?
What happens if not treated
Vitamin B12–deficiency may cause serious complications, such as bleeding, infections, and problems with your brain or nerves that may be permanent. Babies born to mothers who have vitamin B12–deficiency may have developmental delays and birth defects of the brain and spinal cord.
Last updated on March 24, 2022