Anemia
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
0
Anemia
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
What Is Anemia?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment and Management
Anemia in Pregnancy
Types of Anemia
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Vitamin B12–Deficiency Anemia
Hemolytic Anemia
Aplastic Anemia
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Anemia
Anemia Hemolytic Anemia
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What is hemolytic anemia?
What it is
Hemolytic anemia is a blood condition that occurs when your red blood cells are destroyed faster than they can be replaced. Hemolytic anemia can develop quickly or slowly, and it can be mild or serious.
What are the symptoms of hemolytic anemia?
Symptoms
Your symptoms may include tiredness, dizziness, weakness, and a
spleen
spleen
(spleen):
An organ that filters blood, stores blood cells, removes old blood cells, and makes immune cells known as lymphocytes. It is located in the upper left side of the abdomen.
or liver that is larger than normal.
How is hemolytic anemia diagnosed?
Diagnosis
To diagnose hemolytic anemia, your doctor will do a physical exam and order blood tests. Additional tests may include a urine test, a bone marrow test, or genetic tests.
What causes hemolytic anemia?
Causes
Red blood cells develop in the bone marrow, which is the sponge-like tissue inside your bones. Your body normally destroys old or faulty red blood cells in the spleen or other parts of your body through a process called
hemolysis
hemolysis
(hee-MAH-lih-sis):
The breakdown of red blood cells. Red blood cells normally live for up to 120 days. After that, they naturally break down and are most often removed from the blood by the spleen.
. Hemolytic anemia occurs when you have a low number of red blood cells due to too much hemolysis in the body.
Certain conditions can cause hemolysis to happen too fast or too often, including the following:
autoimmune
autoimmune
(AW-toh-ih-MYOON):
A term describing cells and antibodies that a person’s body makes to attack its own tissues, as happens in autoimmune diseases.
conditions
Bone marrow failure
Complications from blood transfusions
Infections
inherited
inherited
(in-HAYR-ih-ted):
The passing of genetic information from a parent to a child through genes.
blood conditions such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia
Some medicines
How is hemolytic anemia treated?
Treatment
If you have mild hemolytic anemia, you may not have any symptoms or need treatment. For others, hemolytic anemia can often be treated or managed. Treatments may include the following:
Blood transfusions
Medicines
Surgery to remove your spleen
Blood and bone marrow transplants
If your hemolytic anemia is caused by medicines or another health condition, your doctor may change your treatment to manage or stop hemolytic anemia.
What happens if hemolytic anemia is not treated?
What happens if not treated
People who have mild hemolytic anemia may not need treatment. Serious hemolytic anemia that is not treated or managed can cause irregular heart rhythms, a heart that is larger than normal, and heart failure if anemia gets severe
Last updated on March 24, 2022