Platelet Disorders
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Platelet Disorders
Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
0
Platelet Disorders
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Platelet Disorders
Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
What Are Platelet Disorders?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment
Living With
Pregnancy and Platelet Disorders
Types
Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
Thrombocythemia and Thrombocytosis
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP)
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Platelet Disorders
Platelet Disorders Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What is ITP?
Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is a type of platelet disorder that develops when your blood does not clot as it should because of a low platelet count. When you are injured, platelets (tiny blood cells) stick together to form a plug, called a blood clot, that seals your wound. When you have a low platelet count, you may have trouble stopping bleeding.
ITP can be acute (short term) or chronic (long term). Acute ITP often lasts less than 12 months. It mainly affects children and is the most common type of ITP. Chronic ITP lasts 12 months or longer and mostly affects adults. However, some teens and children get this type of ITP. Chronic ITP affects women two to three times more often than it affects men.
What are the symptoms of ITP?
ITP may not cause any symptoms. However, ITP can cause bleeding that is hard to stop. This bleeding can occur inside your body, underneath your skin, or on your skin.
Signs of bleeding may include:
Petechiae, which are small, flat red spots under the skin caused by blood leaking from blood vessels
Purpura, which is bleeding under your skin that can cause red, purple, or brownish-yellow spots
Clotted or partially clotted blood under your skin (called a hematoma) that looks or feels like a lump
Nosebleeds or bleeding from your gums
Blood in your urine or stool
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Extreme tiredness
Pale skin color, dizziness, and tiredness if bleeding causes anemia
How is ITP diagnosed?
To diagnose ITP, your provider will ask about your medical and family history. They will also ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam to look for signs of bleeding.
Your provider may order one or more of the following blood tests.
Complete blood count: This test measures your platelet count and the number of other blood cells in your blood.
Blood smear: For this test, some of your blood is put on a slide. A microscope is used to look at your platelets.
Bone marrow tests: These tests check whether your bone marrow is healthy. You may need this test to confirm if you have ITP and not another platelet disorder, especially if your treatment is not working.
If you're at risk of HIV, hepatitis C, Heliocobacter pylori, or other autoimmune conditions, your provider may screen you for these infections, which might be linked to ITP.
What causes ITP?
Problems with your immune system cause ITP. Normally, your immune system helps your body fight off infections and diseases. In ITP, your immune system attacks and destroys your body's platelets by mistake. You may also make fewer platelets. Why this happens is not known.
Some factors that can raise your risk of ITP include:
Antibiotics, antiviral medicines, or medicines to treat inflammation
Viral or bacterial infections, which can trigger your immune system to start destroying platelets
Vaccines, such as the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, which, rarely, can raise the risk of ITP, especially in children
Other immune conditions, such as lupus, and immunodeficiencies, such as CVID
How is ITP treated?
For most children and adults, ITP is not a serious condition. Acute ITP in children often goes away on its own within a few weeks or months and does not return. When it does not go away on its own, treatment is required.
Chronic ITP varies from person to person and can last for many years. Even people who have serious types of chronic ITP can live for decades. Most people who have chronic ITP can stop treatment at some point and maintain a healthy platelet count.
In mild cases, you may not need any treatment, and your provider will monitor your condition to make sure that your platelet count does not become too low. If you need treatment, your treatment plan may include medicines and procedures. If your ITP was caused by an infection, treating the infection may help increase your platelet count and lower your risk of bleeding problems.
Medicines
Medicines often are used as the first treatment for both children and adults.
Corticosteroids, such as prednisone and dexamethasone, are commonly used to treat ITP. They suppress the immune system, which helps increase your platelet count. However, steroids have many side effects, especially when used for a long time. Some people get worse when treatment ends.
Other medicines used to raise platelet counts include:
Eltrombopag, romiplostim, and avatrombopag, which help the body make more platelets. They are taken by mouth.
Immunoglobulin, which is given through an
intravenous
intravenous
(IN-truh-VEE-nus):
Into or within a vein. Most often it refers to giving medicines or fluids through a needle or tube inserted into a vein. Also called IV.
(IV) needle into your bloodstream
Rituximab, which helps prevent the spleen from destroying platelets. It is also given by IV.
Fostamatinib, which helps prevent platelets from being destroyed. It is used when other treatments haven't worked and is taken by mouth.
Removal of your spleen
Doctors can surgically remove your spleen if necessary. The spleen is an organ in your upper left abdomen. It makes antibodies that help fight infections. In ITP, these antibodies destroy platelets by mistake.
Removing your spleen may raise your risk of infections. Before you have the surgery, your healthcare provider may give you antibiotics and vaccines to help prevent infections. Your provider will explain what steps you can take to help avoid infections and what symptoms to watch for.
Platelet transfusions
Platelet transfusions may be given to stop or prevent bleeding in some types of thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction.
For a platelet transfusion, donor platelets from a blood bank are infused into your bloodstream. This increases your platelet count for a short time.
What health problems can ITP cause?
Without proper treatment, ITP can cause serious bleeding and pregnancy complications. Seek immediate medical attention if you have uncontrollable bleeding that does not stop when you apply pressure. Learn how to manage ITP to help avoid complications.
Last updated on July 24, 2025