Pleural Disorders
Home
< Back To Pleural Disorders
Pleurisy, Pleural Effusion, and Pneumothorax
0
Pleural Disorders
MENU
Home
< Back To Pleural Disorders
Pleurisy, Pleural Effusion, and Pneumothorax
What Are Pleural Disorders?
Pleurisy, Pleural Effusion, and Pneumothorax
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment
Recovery
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Pleural Disorders
Pleural Disorders Pleurisy, Pleural Effusion, and Pneumothorax
Language switcher
English
Español
The three types of pleural disorders include pleural effusion, pleurisy, and pneumothorax.
What is pleural effusion?
Pleural effusion is a buildup of fluid in the pleural space. The cause of the buildup determines the type of pleural effusion.
Exudative effusion is caused by a buildup of fluid from
inflammation
inflammation
(IN-fluh-MAY-shun):
A reaction to injury of the body. The signs of inflammation are swelling, redness, or pain.
, tumors, infection, or lung injury. The types of exudative effusion vary by the fluid buildup in the pleural space. For example, an empyema is a buildup of infection or pus, a hemothorax happens when blood builds up, and a chylothorax results from a buildup of chyle, a substance formed in the small intestine.
Transudative pleural effusion is caused by pressure in the blood vessels, most often because of a medical condition such as heart, kidney, or liver failure. The pressure pushes excess fluid into the pleural cavity.
What is pleurisy?
Pleurisy is inflammation of the pleura. It is also called pleuritis.
What is pneumothorax?
A pneumothorax is a collection of air or gas in the pleural space. The buildup of air or gas can put pressure on the lung and cause all or part of it to collapse.
There are different types of pneumothorax.
Spontaneous pneumothorax can happen suddenly and without any known cause or in people without any signs of lung disease. Sometimes, it may be caused by another medical condition that affects the lungs, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Tension pneumothorax is a very large pneumothorax that may result in failure of the heart and the lungs. This can interfere with blood flow through your chest and cause your blood pressure to drop.
Traumatic pneumothorax is caused by a chest injury.
Last updated on March 24, 2022