Sleep Apnea
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Sleep Apnea
Causes and Risk Factors
0
Sleep Apnea
MENU
Home
Health Topics
< Back To Sleep Apnea
Causes and Risk Factors
What Is Sleep Apnea?
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes and Risk Factors
Treatment
Living With
Sleep Apnea and Women
Sleep Apnea in Children
MORE INFORMATION
Participate in a Study
Fact Sheets and Handouts
Research
Sleep Apnea
Sleep Apnea Causes and Risk Factors
Language switcher
English
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
What causes sleep apnea?
Obstructive sleep apnea is caused by conditions that block airflow through your upper airway during sleep. For example, your tongue may fall backward and block your airway.
Central sleep apnea is caused by problems with the way your brain controls your breathing while you sleep.
Your age, family history, lifestyle habits, other medical conditions, and some features of your body (for example, your neck or tongue) can raise your risk for sleep apnea. But healthy lifestyle changes can help lower your risk.
What raises the risk of obstructive sleep apnea?
Many conditions can cause obstructive sleep apnea. Some factors, such as unhealthy lifestyle habits, can be changed. Other factors, such as age and family history, cannot be changed.
Age: Sleep apnea can occur at any age, but your risk increases as you get older. As you age, fatty tissue can build up in your neck and tongue.
Obesity: People with obesity can have increased fat deposits in their neck that can block their upper airway. Maintaining a healthy weight can help prevent or treat sleep apnea caused by obesity.
Large tonsils, neck, or tongue: These features can narrow your upper airway or make it more likely for your tongue to block your airway while you sleep.
Endocrine disorders or changes in your hormonelevels: Your
hormone
hormone
(HOR-moan):
Substance made in glands throughout the body. Hormones are released into the blood to travel throughout the body to control other body functions.
levels can affect the size and shape of your face, tongue, and upper airway. People who have
polycystic ovary syndrome
polycystic ovary syndrome
(PAH-lee-SIS-tik OH-vuh-ree SIN-drome):
A condition that can cause infertility, enlarged ovaries, irregular menstrual cycles, excessive body or facial hair, acne, and obesity.&nbsp;Also called PCOS. POCS increases the risk for diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure and endometrial cancer.
(PCOS), low levels of
thyroid hormones
thyroid hormones
(THY-royd HOR-monz):
Hormones made by the thyroid gland that controls heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, and body weight.
, or high levels of insulin or growth hormone have a higher risk for sleep apnea.
Family history and genetics: Sleep apnea can be
inherited
inherited
(in-HAYR-ih-ted):
The passing of genetic information from a parent to a child through genes.
. Your
genes
gene
(jeen):
The unit that passes heredity from parents to children. Genes are pieces of DNA and contain information for making a specific protein.
help determine the size and shape of your skull, face, and upper airway. Your genes can also raise your risk for other health conditions, such as cleft lip and cleft palate and Down syndrome, which can lead to sleep apnea.
Heart or kidney failure: These conditions can cause fluid to build up in your neck, which can block your upper airway.
Lifestyle habits: Drinking alcohol and smoking can raise your risk for sleep apnea. Alcohol can make the muscles of your mouth and throat relax, which may close your upper airway. Smoking can cause
inflammation
inflammation
(IN-fluh-MAY-shun):
A reaction to injury of the body. The signs of inflammation are swelling, redness, or pain.
in your upper airway, which affects breathing.
Sex: Sleep apnea is more common in men than women. Men are more likely to have serious sleep apnea and to be diagnosed with sleep apnea at a younger age than women.
What raises the risk of central sleep apnea?
The following factors can raise your risk for central sleep apnea.
Health conditions: Some conditions that affect how your brain controls your airways and chest muscles can raise your risk. These include heart failure, stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and myasthenia gravis. Your hormone levels can also affect how your brain controls your breathing.
Opioid use: Opioid use disorder or long-term use of prescribed opioid-based pain medicines can cause problems with how your brain controls sleep.
Family history and genetics: Your genes can affect how your brain controls your breathing during sleep. Genetic conditions, such as congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, can raise your risk.
Lifestyle habits: Drinking alcohol and smoking can affect how your brain controls sleep, or the muscles involved in breathing.
Premature birth: Babies born before 37 weeks of pregnancy have a higher risk for breathing problems during sleep. In most cases, the risk decreases as the baby gets older.
Sex: Central sleep apnea is more common in men than women.
Age: As you get older, normal changes in how your brain controls breathing during sleep may raise your risk for sleep apnea.
Research for your health
NHLBI research found that sleep apnea may raise the risk for high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, and stroke. Our current research will help develop new and improved treatments for sleep apnea to help prevent these complications.
Learn more about the sleep apnea research we support
Can you prevent sleep apnea?
You may be able to prevent obstructive sleep apnea by making healthy lifestyle changes. These changes include adopting a heart-healthy diet, aiming for a healthy weight, quitting smoking, and limiting alcohol intake.
Last updated on January 09, 2025